<!-- Please edit README.Rmd - not README.md -->

# Week 07: Visualisation Part 2

This week will be a bit different from what we’ve covered so far. The
challenge here is to find a dataset, perform some self-guided
exploratory analysis, and finally produce a polished, `{ggplot2}`-based
visualisation to showcase your findings.

# Finding a dataset to use

Feel free to use a dataset from your usual work (so long as it doesn’t
include any sensitive data) or to use any other dataset you find
interesting.

Alternatively, the R4DS Community’s
[TidyTuesday](https://github.com/rfordatascience/tidytuesday) project
may be a good place to look for a dataset to use. If you use one of
these datasets, you may want to post your visualisation on twitter with
the \#TidyTuesday hashtag. Doing this and seeing other people’s
visualisations is a great learning experience :)

# Getting inspiration

The [\#TidyTuesday hashtag](https://twitter.com/hashtag/tidytuesday) on
twitter is a great place to see the sort of thing that people regularly
produce for the weekly TidyTuesday dataviz challenge. Many of these
include links to the code used. Cédric Scherer is a frequent contributor
whose code and visualisations are all [published on
GitHub](https://github.com/z3tt/TidyTuesday).

# Exporting your visualisation

Exporting your finished graphic can be tricky, however this is made
easier if you use the [`{ragg}` package](https://ragg.r-lib.org/),
particularly as it provides much easier methods of resizing plots than
other packages/approaches. Look at the linked documentation for some
examples of how to do this.

# Using R Markdown

Note that this is also a good opportunity to try using R Markdown to
combine your analysis, code and final graphics into a single document.
If you choose this approach, please create a subfolder in the repo for
your work, e.g.  `solutions/your-ad-username/week-07-more-visualsation`,
name your document `README.Rmd` and make sure the output format is
`md_document`. Doing this will mean that the output displays nicely on
DevOps. You can take a look at [the source file for this
document](README.Rmd) for an example of how to do this.

As usual, please format your code according to the [Tidyverse style
guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/).

Good luck! :)
